# Assignment and Local State

We need strategies to help us structure large systems
so that they can be divided "naturally" into coherent parts
that can be separately developed and maintained.

One strategy concentrates on the collection of objects in the system
whose behaviors may change over time.

An alternative strategy concentrates on the streams of information
that flow in the system,
much as an electrical engineer views a signal-processing system.

An object has state if its behavior is influenced by its history.
A bank account's balance depends on its history of deposits and withdrawals.

In a system of many objects, the objects are rarely independent.
Each may influence the state of others through interactions.
Each object's state is characterized by local state variables.
To model state variables by ordinary symbolic names in the programming language,
the language must provide an assignment operator
to enable us to change the value associated with a name.

## 3.1.1 Local State Variables

We want a procedure `withdraw` to behave like:

```
(withdraw 25)
75
(withdraw 25)
50
(withdraw 60)
"Insufficient funds"
(withdraw 15)
35
```

Observe that the expression `(withdraw 25)`,
evaluated twice, yields different values.
This is a new kind of behavior for a procedure.

To implement `withdraw`,
we can use a variable `balance` to indicate the balance of and account
and define `withdraw` as a procedure that accesses `balance`.

```lisp
(define balance 100)

(define (withdraw amount)
  (if (>= balance amount)
      (begin (set! balance (- balance amount))
             balance)
      "Insufficient funds"))
```

Decrementing balance is accomplished by the expression:

```lisp
(set! balance (- balance amount))
```

This uses the `set!` special form, whose syntax is:

```
(set! <name> <new-value>)
```

Here `<name>` is a symbol and `<new-value>` is any expression.
`set!` changes `<name>` so that its value is
the result obtained by evaluating `<new-value>`.

`withdraw` also uses the `begin` special form
to cause two expressions to be evaluated:
first decrementing balance and then returning the value of balance.

```
(begin <exp1> <exp2> ... <expk>)
```

causes the expressions `<exp1>` through `<expk>`
to be evaluated in sequence
and the value of the final expression `<expk>` to be returned
as the value of the entire `begin` form.

`balance` is a name defined in the global environment
and is freely accessible to be examined or modified by any procedure.
It would be better if we could make `balance` internal to `withdraw`:

```lisp
(define new-withdraw
  (let ((balance 100))
    (lambda (amount)
      (if (>= balance amount)
          (begin (set! balance (- balance amount))
                 balance)
          "Insufficient funds"))))
```

Combining `set!` with local variables is the general programming technique
we will use for constructing computational objects with local state.

When we first introduced procedures,
we also introduced the substitution model of evaluation (section 1.1.5)
to provide an interpretation of what procedure application means.
When we introduce assignment into our language,
substitution is no longer an adequate model of procedure application.

This procedure returns a bank account object with a specified initial balance:

```lisp
(define (make-account balance)
  (define (withdraw amount)
    (if (>= balance amount)
        (begin (set! balance (- balance amount))
               balance)
        "Insufficient funds"))
  (define (deposit amount)
    (set! balance (+ balance amount))
    balance)
  (define (dispatch m)
    (cond ((eq? m 'withdraw) withdraw)
          ((eq? m 'deposit) deposit)
          (else (error "Unknown request -- MAKE-ACCOUNT"
                       m))))
  dispatch)
```

Each call to `make-account` sets up an environment
with a local state variable `balance`.
Within this environment,
procedures `deposit` and `withdraw` access `balance`
and an additional procedure `dispatch` takes a "message" as input
and returns one of the two local procedures.
The `dispatch` procedure itself is returned as
the value that represents the bank-account object.
This is a message-passing style of programming.

`make-account` can be used as follows:

```
(define acc (make-account 100))
((acc 'withdraw) 50)
50
((acc 'withdraw) 60)
"Insufficient funds"
((acc 'deposit) 40)
90
((acc 'withdraw) 60)
30
```

Each `acc` call returns the locally defined `deposit` or `withdraw` procedure,
which is then applied to the specified `amount`.

Another call to `make-account`:

```lisp
(define acc2 (make-account 100))
```

will produce a separate `account` object,
which maintains its own local `balance`.
